# A bunch of late thoughts on the COVID-19 Lockdown & other restrictions enforced in Bharat

**June 1, 2021**

Last year, I came across several opinions on whether the government should force people to stay at their homes when the COVID-19 cases were on the rise, primarily to flatten the curve and not overwhelm the healthcare system.

1. Our government, the establishment news outlets and generally those who are well-off economically were of the opinion that it was a decision of “lives vs livelihoods”. They proposed a compulsory complete/partial stay-at-home order or what is famously called a “lockdown” in Bharat.

2. While some others thought that we should not consider “livelihoods” or economics as a secondary factor and that livelihoods are equivalent to lives for many (like Professor Jay Bhattacharya said in [this](https://youtu.be/vLFfd9_JmaI) video). They had a different outlook on solving the problem (e.g. [Great Barrington Declaration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Barrington_Declaration)).

3. At the same time, some (most of whom were generally pro-lockdowns) were proposing giving cash handouts to support the ones in need (like what happened in various other countries) as a mid-way.

I think it was quite logical to adopt what was stated in the Great Barrington Declaration. However, for all its merits, some people might still (and they already have) come out with their own arguments against it and still support a lockdown. It is quite obvious that lockdowns asymmetrically affect different people based on their income and occupation; hence, I think it is imperative that everyone makes their own decision for “their life vs their livelihood/income” rather than the government making it for them. In this article, I will show how everyone could have made this decision for themselves and we could have simultaneously ensured that the people who wanted to stay at their homes and avoid contact could have done so. All of this could have been implemented with enforcement mechanisms that are simpler than imposing compulsory stay-at-home orders.

Those who didn’t want to take the risk of leaving their homes could have very well stayed at their homes and avoided most of the contact. The only contact they wouldn’t have been able to avoid would be their contact with the people who provide them essential commodities like food, gas, etc. The people providing these goods & services might be having additional contact if there was no lockdown and so are more likely to be infected; thus making the probability of a person who decided to quarantine (except for buying essentials) being infected higher. However, it is not like this little risk could not have been made negligible. The government could have quarantined the people working in the [PDS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_distribution_system) (i.e. all working at ration shops, transportation, storage, etc.) when they are not at their job. This could have been made possible by making special camps for their shelter when the cases/deaths are on the rise. The people who wanted to stay at their homes could have purchased essential commodities from these ration (fair-price) shops and still stay safe.

If there is a household where a particular set of members (say the older ones) take the decision of staying at home and avoid contact with everyone, then I think it is pretty safe to assume that their fellow family members would be reasonable enough to also stay at home themselves or make an alternative arrangement to avoid contact with them. They definitely care about their family more than the government. However, if, by any chance, the government thinks that they would care more, they could have set up a consent system<sup>[[1](#myfootnote1)]</sup> using which the family/household could grant consent for their working members (or any member for that matter). The police, who were (and are) working day and night to ensure that people don’t leave their homes and businesses are shut, could have been assigned the duty to check if a person found in a public place or factory/shop is carrying such a consent.

This way, the people who want to leave their homes have consent from the people near them and the people who want to quarantine have their own jugaad for buying essentials without much risk. If the government didn’t adopt a lockdown and the people who are pro-lockdown used whatever political pressure they’re capable of to force the government to end a lockdown with the appropriate measures (like the ones I described), they would have been completely isolated from those who wanted to leave their homes to ensure their livelihood.

I agree that if we left this decision (of staying-at-home or not) at the individual level and did not have a compulsory stay-at-home order, then it is imperative that everyone has the information to make the right decision for themselves - most important of which is the fatality rate of the virus. Some might say that many people in Bharat don’t have this information and that the government is incapable of providing the right information to the citizens; thus making grounds for making an argument to continue the lockdown. If someone is making this argument, they are essentially saying that the government is incapable of providing our best estimate on the virus’s fatality rate to the people but totally capable of enforcing a compulsory stay-at-home order. Both of these approaches require certain nodal officers and their assistants to establish contact with the people:

- To enforce a compulsory stay-at-home order, the police establish contact with people to close down factories and shops and make sure no one gets out of their homes.

- In a situation where there is no compulsory stay-at-home order, some other part of the government apparatus, with the [privilege of communicating with people using radio waves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio), ensures that the people have the right information about the virus’s fatality rate so that they can make the right decision for themselves.

Hence, one can’t support lockdowns and also say that the government was (or is) incapable of providing this information to the people.

I find it amusing that they are somehow making a case for giving the government or themselves or whosoever the authority to do the cost-benefit analysis of the risk of loss of life or being seriously ill vs livelihood for everyone in the country/state. I don’t understand how someone in this world can make such a decision for someone from a completely different economic situation. It would have been great if the people who want to make such a decision for others donated their salaries and properties to those for whom they are making such a decision. Surprisingly, the same (state and central) government that failed to provide adequate healthcare to us (especially during the second wave but [essentially each and every year](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/poor-healthcare-kills-16-lakh-in-india-every-year-finds-study/articleshow/65693980.cms)) and forced so many migrant workers to walk/cycle back home are getting to make such decisions. And the so-called intellectuals are supporting their analysis with an unwanted interference into the lives of those whose lives depend on their livelihoods.

Every concerned person will ask why am I coming up with such an article right now? When so much damage has already been done to people’s livelihoods due to an unreasonable and (according to me) a spurious problem (namely lockdowns) masquerading as a “solution”.

I was against complete lockdowns during the first wave and any lockdown this year. However, I had never expressed this opinion in public. I only discussed it with my family and very few selected friends until I put out some tweets later (in April 2021) to the Prime Minister and my Chief Minister, ordering them to end the lockdown, night curfews, weekend curfews etc. I was just not confident in expressing an opinion that was totally against the opinion that was blurted out loud authoritatively by the government, establishment news, dis-intellectuals masquerading as intellectuals and some “concerned educated upper-middle-class Indians”. I had stopped thinking about the situation and continued with a near-normal life because I was fortunate enough to do so. I am quite disappointed with my decision of restoring to a supposed “correct image” amongst the people who surround me (by agreeing with them) rather than doing what is needed to ensure the best for the people of Bharat. I apologize for the same (if it means anything now).

I have written this article retrospectively, but it is not like we are free of lockdowns. Many cities, including the one I live in, are still closed for the most part, and such a saga might repeat in subsequent waves. It is best that we end existing lockdowns and don’t issue such compulsory stay-at-home orders again in the future.

<a name="myfootnote1">1</a> Establishing a system using which family/household members can give their working (or other) members consent to leave their home wouldn’t be a tough task considering the government has the fingerprints of almost everyone because of the UID and verification of ink-on-paper fingerprints is [possible](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2529861_Verification_of_Ink-on-paper_Fingerprints_by_Using_Image_Processing_Techniques_and_a_New_Matching_Operator) using image processing. If this doesn’t sound good to you, we can also use a system like [this](https://www.rahulmehta.com/rlpp.htm) to verify if a consent has been granted.
