# The denialism of anarcho-capitalists

*July 30, 2022*

I haven’t seen a better denialists than ancaps. 

Ancaps love to spend hours ranting how the government is stealing your wealth via taxation and then spending it however they want. But what will happen in a world without any government? One would have to rely on private security firms to own any property. They believe that since these private security firms will have to compete to get new customers, they’ll be more efficient in enforcing property rights than the present-day military, police and courts. What they don't understand is that these private security firms will not compete in the same way that an apple-seller competes in a world with the government enforcing private property rights. In our present-day world, an apple-seller can’t kill a competing apple seller to capture the market. He’ll probably land in jail if he tries to pursue such a strategy. But a private security firm, in absence of the government, will pursue the strategy of simply going at war with the other private security firm to capture the market. The firms with better weapons will prevail. What proof do I have? Such wars have existed throughout the history of us humans. There is anarchy at the international level. But this doesn’t stop here. The private security firms will be in no obligation to obey your decision of not paying for their service because they have real power. They can charge you whatever they want, just like modern day governments levy taxes. Of course there will be constraints over how much can the firm exploit its customers. But those constrains will be no more or less than any authoritative government. 

My point is that we already live in an "ancap world" and the ancaps are in denial that we don't. There is no difference between the imaginary private security firms and an authoritative government. As a response to such criticism, ancaps argue that civilian ownership of firearms and being part of a local tribe can enable you to protect yourself and your property from such an exploitative private security firm. The problem is that this is what the history of the world is: authoritative governments took over such small tribes long back. The tribes were defeated by standing professional armies and then revolutionaries all across the world worked self-lessly to ensure common civilians have more control over these private security firms (our modern-day world full of republics). My problem with ancaps is that they want us to completely renounce decades of the self-less hard-work of the revolutionaries who have given us common civilians a special kind of private security firms where now majority of us common civilians can decide who the board of directors and CEOs (representatives and Presidents) of these private security security firms will be (in all modern-day republics), where some can override the board of directors of these private security firms adopt and vote on laws themselves (in all those countries, states and local governments which have the provision of citizen triggered referendums) and also enforce those laws (in all those countries which have jury trials and lay judges). They want to completely reverse this world order and make us go 300 years in the past. 

The way forward is not to let go of these private security firms on which most of us already have some level of control, it is to increase our control over these private security firms. And simply passing laws that increase our control over them won’t work unless we common civilians are armed to teeth. Right to bear firearms might be the only issue on which I fully agree with ancaps, so let’s end it there.
