# Imagining a cheap university

*March 25, 2022*

I'm not going to talk about the bugs in the way universities look to train students because I know I lie either in the &quot;valley of despair&quot; region in the [graph used to visualise the dunning-kruger effect](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_Effect_01.svg). I'll just give a try on how we can reconstruct a cheap university that might not offer all of what the existing universities offer but will be much better for those who simply can&#39;t afford to attend a traditional one.

A very brief primer on the bug: America&#39;s student loan problem is well-known to netizens who&#39;ve spent the bare minimum time in watching English-language content but a lot of those who&#39;ll read this essay might not realise how difficult it is to afford college for an average Indian. An average Indian, who probably earns ~Rs. 10,000 per month [1] would have to save or go into debt of ~Rs. 10,00,000 (100x his monthly salary) to just make one of his kids get their engineering undergraduate degree (it would be lesser for commerce and humanities degrees). I&#39;m not even looking at those in the bottom ~20 percentile because I guess they first [need to afford to make their kids complete high school](http://164.100.24.220/loksabhaquestions/annex/176/AU2108.pdf) - attending university is a pipedream for them. If you don&#39;t think this is a bug at all, you&#39;re free to exit reading this essay here because the rest of it just assumes this is a big problem worth solving. (The solution I&#39;ll describe would work for India, US or for that matter any country)

Before thinking about the solution, I think it is important to understand what makes elite universities so valuable, and this is where I like Peter Thiel&#39;s line of thinking, &quot;[the value of the elite universities comes from excluding people, it&#39;s like the Studio 54 nightclub where you want there to be an enormous line of people outside and don&#39;t want to let anybody in](https://youtu.be/1T-RkxC5pVU).&quot; This exclusion gives those at elite universities access to elite professors, elite TAs and elite peers and access to research facilities. Students at elite universities learn by attending lectures delivered by elite professors, their (and their elite TA&#39;s) office hours, assist them and their elite grad students in their research, by spending time on their challenging problem sets (or HWs), studying for their challenging exams and while doing all of that, learning from other smart people around. It would only be possible to achieve our goal of reconstructing a cheap university if we&#39;re able to make the value elite universities derive from exclusion as low as possible by scaling the three important scarce resources - elite professors, TAs and peers - for the masses.

Government of India&#39;s Ministry of Education has worked on making [an archive of the lectures for courses delivered at IITs and IISc (NPTEL)](https://nptel.ac.in/courses) which already has lectures for 2300+ courses, and I think it shouldn&#39;t be very costly to upload the rest of the courses and constantly update the archive in the future. I&#39;ve personally studied from some of their courses and I also know several of my friends and random strangers on online forums who use their lectures regularly. Hence, the value derived from attending lectures delivered by elite professors seems to be easily transferable to those who&#39;re in the long queue outside the nightclub.

Challenging problem sets (or HWs) and exams: &quot;[Eliminate university credentials and replace them with standardized testing. Leave their ability to educate in place. Watch the student loan problem slowly take care of itself](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1404508591193612289),&quot; tweeted Naval Ravikant. I think this is the perfect solution to transfer the value derived from the challenging problems that students at elite universities solve. All you need is a new university department that allows anyone to take all the midterms, final exams and probably also get all the problem sets (or HWs) graded. It can give a transcript to them which they can use for a foot in the door in the industry and research positions (who knows, professors might also be willing to take grad students who&#39;ve just taken tests at an elite university). This should be dirt cheap compared to the tuition fees of universities. In [the university I attend](https://illinois.edu/), most if not all of the classrooms and labs are empty after 6pm, and the auditoriums are also not always booked. I&#39;m sure this would be the case with most universities. Most, if not all, of these new students can take the tests in these facilities, and for the rest, the university can rent out private facilities like they do for JEE Mains and Advanced. A bulk of the expenses would be for hiring a lot of graders. Apart from this, they&#39;d have to spend extra for the janitorial and administrative services. In [this spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1hpqGhBW1wZk9odPy9Go6Kazp-4EMsFjwNQXiKSk-KVs/edit?usp=sharing), I&#39;ve tried to calculate all the expenses that such a program at a university like the one I attend might have to bear (and this assumes that university can’t use any of its existing facilities as a testing centre). They&#39;re in US$. Using PPP conversion for USD to INR, this would come out to be ~Rs. 15,000 per semester, or Rs. 60,000 for a whole undergraduate degree i.e. ~16 times lower than what a BTech/BE degree would cost. In fact, the Government of India&#39;s [SWAYAM program](https://swayam.gov.in/nc_details/NPTEL) is offering standardized testing for some NPTEL courses. As far as I know, these tests are not the same as the exams students take in IITs or IISc. Also, they only offer services for the final exam currently. All they have to do is offer students to take any exam made for an IIT/IISc student, scale it for all courses in a major first, then multiple degrees and then also let students take the midterm exams and problem sets (or HWs).

I don&#39;t think there&#39;s any way to transfer the value derived from attending the office hours of elite professors and their elite TAs to the masses, perhaps arranging time independently would be the only way out. The value derived from research opportunities is also limited by the funds the university has but I think once students have an opportunity to go through the process of taking tests at these elite universities, they&#39;ll be more or less prepared to give competition to their elite counterparts at research/industry internship/job roles. So in a way, the competition for both existing research positions and internships &amp; jobs in the industry will increase and it&#39;ll be more meritorious because it wouldn&#39;t exclude those who couldn&#39;t attend universities because of cost constraints.

All in all, I think such a standardized testing program would be much better than a free college subsidized by taxpayers. It doesn&#39;t take someone&#39;s money and gives it to a small bunch of students - it increases the access of resources for all students.

<hr>

Footnotes:

[1] I couldn&#39;t find data for median income of Indians, our mean is ~Rs. 17,000 but our median would be quite lower due to the [high income inequality](https://www.cnbctv18.com/economy/india-among-most-unequal-nations-top-1-of-population-holds-22-of-national-income-report-11737272.htm).
