# Scaling elite universities

*March 25, 2022*

When I talk about higher education, I don't spend time thinking about the bugs in the way universities look to train students because I know I lie either in the &quot;valley of despair&quot; region in the [graph used to visualise the dunning-kruger effect](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_Effect_01.svg). I'll just give a try on how we can reconstruct a "cheap university extension" that might not offer all of what the existing universities offer but will be much better for those who simply couldn’t get into the one that they wanted to because they weren’t “smart” enough or couldn’t afford it.

If we don't know on what makes universities valuable then we might end up scaling some futile resources. I like [Peter Thiel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Thiel)'s line of thinking here, "[the value of the elite universities comes from excluding people, it&#39;s like the Studio 54 nightclub where you want there to be an enormous line of people outside and don&#39;t want to let anybody in](https://youtu.be/1T-RkxC5pVU)." Although, he was saying this to gain some ground for advocating that universities are useless (which they are for certain career paths) but the kind of exclusion he is talking about gives those students at elite universities access to elite professors, elite TAs, elite peers and elite research facilities. Students at elite universities learn by attending lectures delivered by elite professors, their (and their elite TA&#39;s) office hours, assist them and their elite grad students in their research, by spending time on their challenging problem sets (or HWs), studying for their challenging exams and while doing all of that, learning from other smart people around.

Universities have done a decent job of providing some material online through MOOCs - be it MIT OCW or other course hosting websites, or the Indian government's [NPTEL program](https://nptel.ac.in/courses). They don't cover everything but recording and hosting video lectures online is dirt cheap now, so scaling that shouldn't be a big problem and should be expected - atleast from public universities. Then there are some resources that one simply cannot offer, like office hours of elite professors, their TAs and research assistant roles because they're scarce by nature. What universities can (should; for public universities) do but aren't doing is what Naval Ravikant goes on describing in [this tweet](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1404508591193612289):

>Eliminate university credentials and replace them with standardized testing. 
>
>Leave their ability to educate in place. 
>
>Watch the student loan problem slowly take care of itself

I think this is the perfect solution to transfer the value derived from the challenging problems that students at elite universities solve. All you need is a new university department that allows anyone to take all the midterms, final exams and probably also get all the problem sets (or HWs) graded. It can give a transcript to them which they can use for a foot in the door in the industry and research positions (who knows, professors might also be willing to take grad students who&#39;ve just taken tests at an elite university). This should be dirt cheap compared to the tuition fees of universities. 

In [the university I attend](https://illinois.edu/), most if not all of the classrooms and labs are empty after 6pm, and the auditoriums are also not always booked. I&#39;m sure this would be the case with other universities as well. All of these new students can take the tests in these facilities; in the worst case scenario, the university can rent out private facilities like the Government of India does for JEE Mains and Advanced examinations. A bulk of the expenses would be for hiring graders. Apart from this, they&#39;d have to spend extra for the janitorial and administrative services. In [this spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1hpqGhBW1wZk9odPy9Go6Kazp-4EMsFjwNQXiKSk-KVs/edit?usp=sharing), I&#39;ve tried to calculate all the expenses that such a program at a university like the one I attend might have to bear (and this assumes that university can’t use any of its existing facilities as a testing centre). They&#39;re in US$. Using PPP conversion for USD to INR, this would come out to be ~Rs. 15,000 per semester, or Rs. 60,000 for a whole undergraduate degree i.e. ~16 times lower than what a BTech/BE degree would cost. 

In fact, Government of India&#39;s [SWAYAM program](https://swayam.gov.in/nc_details/NPTEL) is offering standardized testing for some NPTEL courses. As far as I know, these tests are not the same as the exams students take in IITs or IISc. Also, they only offer services for the final exam currently. All they have to do is offer students to take any exam made for an IIT/IISc student, scale it for all courses in a major first, then multiple degrees and then also let students take the midterm exams and problem sets (or HWs).

All-in-all, be it the American student loan problem or India's "good higher education access problem", scaling essential university resources for mass access is the cheapest and probably the most efficient solution.
